3 October 2023--SOST201 Lecture

Today, we revist something we've already put forth a few times in the last two weeks: the way in which Founding Era-Southerners saw slavery. To revist today is not to beat a dead horse, but to make certain we understand that the 18th century South's complex understanding of slavery sets in motion a view of slavery that will have 19th century consequences; that many of the tensions and paradoxes we see in 19th century views of slavery have origins in this earlier era; to explain how slavery was understood in this era so as to help us make sense of subsequent re-presentations of slavery in later years and how those two eras differed from one another; and to face head-on one of the most significant issues with understanding American history--what's with all this talk of liberty and equality if only White men are included?

That common complaint is a serious one and the reality of African chattel slavery forces us into a serious inquiry into the complaint's validity. Were 18th century Southerners, whom we know saw slavery as a moral wrong and equated their maltreatment by the Crown and Parliament with slavery, merely hypocrites? Could they have done more to end slavery? Can we approach the question of slavery simply in terms of abstract moralizing about its ethical ergregiousness and its overwise ignoble treatment of other human beings? Or must we understand it within a greater context? Does contextualization simply excuse the awfulness of institution? Or does it more precisely show how insidious the institution was and explain why it was so difficult to disentangle?

TJ is inescapable and necessary here; however, let us be careful not to do the same thing that I took CTC to task for: making the entirity of the South  and Southern thought reducable to a handful of quotes or a single individual. I recognize the danger of what we are attempting today on so many levels! But TJ is, as noted, in many ways the inescapable Southerner of this era; we can, in many quite valid ways, see him as articulating across his entire career a set of foundational principles that would become not just typically, but normatively, Southern across the 19th century. As the 19th century gave us our ideas of South that still shape our own thinking about the region as a coherent and unique sociocultural entity, Jefferson is in some ways the original Southerner (even though he would not come to think of himself as really anything other than a Virginian until near the end of his life). Jefferson did not invent the South nor the ideas thereof; rather, he was the most eloquent and volumnious articulator of a set of ideas about society, culture, economics, and politics that organically developed south of Mason & Dixon's line across the 17th and 18th centuries and that would, by the second quarter of the 19th century, be found to have filtered across the Appalachians, southwesterly over to the hill country of central Texas, west-north-westerly into Missouri, parts of the Midwest, and the Plains, down south through Florida, transversing the Fall Line in so doing--and, at every step of the way, having significant regional and class-based variations. The Charleston aristocrats of 1790 may have seen Jefferson as a dangerous liberal, even a radical, but 40 years later their grandsons would be preaching a similar gospel of decentralization, self-determination and localism, and liberty as the Tennessee backcountryman of Jefferson's own day.

Thus, like it or not, we *have* to contend with Jefferson. And his thoughts on slavery in the 18th century are incredibly relevant to how--and why--the South thinks about slavery as it does. To miss the nuances of this, and to reduce Southern slavery as little more than simply an anti-Black immorality, is to fundamentally misunderstand how and why slavery existed as it did in the South during this era and in the subsequent generations. To discuss these nuances is not to ignore anti-Blackness; in some ways, it makes that all the more pronounced. Let us first begin today with two thought experiments:

1--Based on what we've read, both for today and from the textbook and elsewhere over the last couple of weeks, think about this question: let's say that slavery did not exist in the South in 1790, but that all of the other political principles of the era still exist, unchanged. If someone introduced race-based chattel slavery as a labor system, do you think Southerners of that era would have accepted it? Why or why not?
2--Is "the economy" as defensible answer to upholding something you know to be morally problematic, or even wrong? Maybe you believe that climate change is an existential threat; would collapsing the economy be an acceptable if that negated climate change? What about when we consider that that economic collapse would be most significantly felt by the poor and most vulnerable populations? Are we morally pure when we use our technology--consider where rare earth minerals come from? Should we be bothered by this? If we stop using these technologies to be morally pure, what are the consequences for us personally? Are these acceptable? Does impoverishing ourselves actually change things--that is, would our not using these technologies make a difference inasmuch as most people would still continue to use them and thus exploit labor?

With those happy thoughts in mind, we look to a corallary situation in the late 18th century; slavery is for men like Jefferson something unwillingly inherited from their great-great-grandfathers *and* something they profit from. Jefferson himself over the course of his life owned 600 human beings (not all at the same time) but, to my knowledge, never bought or sold a single one. Rather, these came from inheritance, marriage, laws establishing the enslavement of children thus making the children of women enslaved to him *also* enslaved to him. At the same time, Jefferson profited significantly from their labor; he was wealthy because he owned them, both in that they formed the most significant part of his wealth and that the work they provided created the rest of his wealth (they also stood collatoral for debts and gave him access to credit, another significant fact of the South in this era when liquid capital was limited). And yet, Jefferson knows that slavery is immoral; in this tension, TJ is far from unique. Rather, he is quite quotidian across the South of this era.

Jefferson wrote and acted against slavery--against the slave trade/imporation of new enslaved Africans, against the worst abuses of the system, against the continuation of the system itself--on multiple occassions throughout his public career. One such interesting moment is when, in 1770, he represented a slave named Samuel Howell in court in a trial known as Howell v. Netherland.

Howell's great-grandmother was a white woman impregnated by a black man. Her daughter was born in 1705. Under a law passed in Virginia that same year, mixed-race children of this sort were born enslaved until their 31st birthdays; under a law passed in 1723, that same principle applied to *their* children. Howell was thus enslaved under this legal arrangement, but at 28, he sued his new owner, Joshua Netherland, demanding his freedom. Jefferson took the case pro bono, one of six such cases he would take across his legal career (which ended during the Revolution when he moved into politics). TJ argued that the 1723 law did not apply to the *third* generation. He also argued that, per what we see in a Summary View and the Declaration,t hat all men are by nature free: "Under the law of nature, all men are born free, every one comes into the world with a right to his own person, which includes the liberty of moving and using it at his own will. This is what is called personal liberty, and is given him by the author of nature, because necessary for his own sustenance." For TJ, slavery is a negation of liberty and, more importantly, liberty is that which transcends the law; liberty is anterior to the law, *not* posterior to it. The law, if it is to be just, is presuppossed upon liberty; the law does not grant liberty, which comes from God/belongs to us ontologically. This point will be important a bit later!

Jefferson loses the case, but we see his principles in play. Of course, some, like historian Douglas Egerton, decry the falsity in Jefferson's thinking here, saying he only represented Howell and saw Howell's appeal to liberty as connected to Howell's skin color; Howell had very little African blood in him and, for all intents and purposes, appeared White. We must also note that of the slaves Jefferson manumitted during his lifetime, most of them were of mixed-race--and thus light-skinned--ancestry. This may speak to Jefferson's racism; it may also speak to Jefferson's recognition of the problem of integrating Blacks into a society in which their full acceptance as fellow citizens would always be in question because of how difficult integrating them, whose skin would always say "they had once been slaves" would always be with them. Thus, we may have Jefferson-as-racist, we may also have Jefferson-as-accepting practical political realities. BOTH MAY BE TRUE, AND BOTH MAY BE TRUE AT THE SAME TIME; furthermore, what is true for TJ may be more broadly true for White Southernres of this era (and subsequent eras?!?).

Look at Query XIV
Look at article on Tucker's Dissertation
Finally, look at Bannaker's letter to Jefferson--what dilemma does it present? Are White Southerners ever able to get outside of this dilemma? Does Bannaker's letter point to something true in the assessment from the Tucker article--does natural rights discourse produce racism (we cannot shake this thing and it is inesecapable, but we know it to be wrong and contrary to the rights of these enslaved men, thus we have to think that they are not fully capable of liberty *right now* or, in a worse scenario, *naturally incapable of liberty*) in this context?

Could Jefferson have done more than he did, as a lawyer and as a politician? Could White Southerners of his or the subsquent era that knew the institution was immoral? Or is this something inherited that they knew they could not shake without economic ruin--and feared that they would have blood in the streets? Do the events of the time reinforce those beliefs in a reasonable manner? What would you have done? Answer the question quietly to yourself--are your private answers and your public answer to that question the same? Look back to our earlier thought experiments. 

Is Jefferson--and other men like him--a moral hypocrite? Sure, of a certainity. But he, and we, are men, and not gods; is moral hypocrisy an inescapable fact? 