Today we continue to look at slavery, but from a very different perspective. Yet we are unable to escape the need to think about slavery, and even the experiences of slavery, as part of a larger socioeconomic and political situation. We in our day and time tend to think about slavery *merely* in the abstract as a moral issue; we reocgnize it as morally objectionable and, with it being so alien to us socio-culturally, we reject it merely on moral grounds Yet, in the 19th century, slavery as a political statement, as a socioeconomic system, these were inescapable things and every reaction to slavery was colored by these. This is true of enslaved people just as much as those who owned slaves and those outside of the system who commented on it. For instance....

anecdotes/commentary from Elder's Calhoun biography

Recognize that Old Sawney and the other Fort Hill slaves understood themselves as both people living in a situation where paternalistic care existed side-by-side with any sort of self-determination (with paternalism reinforcing this lack) AND as a commodity. Genovese argues that community care and attempts to keep the slave together as best as possible underlies so much of how enlsaved blacks navigate slavery in this era; slaves understood themselves as simultaneously people and property, embedded in a situation that had, on the hand, a logic of community and even family (as we'll see next time, the ideas of "our people" and "our white folks" are real and shaped much of the intimacy of black/white relationships) while, on the other hand, acting simultaneoulsy with an economic logic, a logic increasingly shaped by the demands of industrialism. Again, if not for the insatiable demand for cotton in Northern and British factories, does slavery survive as long as it does, to the extent that it does?

Slavery is thus shaped by economic exigencies and responses to it are often economic--as we see in a very different way with Hinton Helper today. But before turning to him, I want to look at a couple of other examples of reactions to slavery being shaped by sociocultural and economic logics, and how these bleed into notions of morality. Let us then briefly consider abolitionism/anti-slavery arguments/movements and pro-slavery--or at least status quo-promoting--responses to abolitionism. What are the contexts of abolitionism?

MOVE TO OTHER SHEET.

These ideas of labor and the (perceived) socioeconomic status of both the slave and the master manifest in interesting ways in what is one of the strangest abolitionist books ever written: Helper's The Impending Crisis (1857).

Background: Helper was born in Mocksville, NC to yeoman slaveholders--his father was part of the large group of small slaveholding whites that we've discussed. When he was orphaned as a young boy, he he was passed around to the homes of his extended family, who were all financially stable and permitted him to be well-educated. In some ways, his background was much like that of Calhoun; he was not a poor or low-status white, even though he is arguing against slavery *on their behalf*. 

Helper was an ardent white supremacist who believed that whites and non-whites could not co-exist outside of a system like slavery. Yet, he saw in the system of slavery an ecnomic order that enriched some whites and yet that was economically backwards, hurting the ability of non-slaveholding whites to advance economically. Notice that Helper is essentially critiquing slavery via the logic of "laziness" and labor. The moral wretchedness of slavery is that it retards access to capital and the development of more advanced economic models in the South, keeping many whites poor. Slavery, in this view, is wrong because it hurts non-slaveholding whites. 

Of course, for many in this era, the desire was to acquire enough money to become a slaveholder oneself. But Helper takes a different tack here; in a way, what he is promoting is a sort of radical return to the Jeffersonian ideal of a yeoman's republic. Note how often he complains about the way in which the plantation system makes land unavailable to Southern whites. Again and again, he negatively contrasts Southern agriculture to that in the Midwest, where small-scale landholders are, per his statistics, producing agricultural produces much more efficiently. This is the mdoel that Helper wants to see adopted in the South and, to do so, he wants to see elite plantation owners dispossessed of their land, taxed heavily, and the taxes used to send all slaves to South America or Africa. 

This argument is thus strangely progressive; his is very much a "soak the rich" argument aimed at destroying the 1% in the name of the 99%. The stastics he brings to bear on the problem fit the perspective of many in the North who, as we have seen are already predisposed to make sense of the immorality of slavery in at least partially economic terms--the critique of the inefficiency of slavery here fits much of the Northern attitude. And, unsurprisingly, the book was embraced by the North, where it sold wildly and was incredibly influential. 

Of coruse, the book is quite long. While it was known in the South almost from the day it was published--and alarmed many in the South, who now looked at low-status whites as a potential internal enemy just as, if not more, dangerous than the threats of slave rebellion--it took a while to gain traction in the North. In 1859, it was published in a condensed version called the "Compendium" by Northern abolitionists; abolitionists like newspaperman Horace Greely (who also promoted veganism, feminism, temperance, and new religious movements) aggressively promoted it in the North. The recently-formed Republican Party (this is the same GOP that exists now) embraced the Compendium and utilized some of its arguments in campaigns in 1860.

 Imporantly, the compendium rolls back the most aggressive and insurrectionist rhetoric. This has consequences. Whereas most of the Northern readership knew it only in its truncated version, and thus saw in it a sweeping, statistics-based critique of slavery as a backwards economic system that could convince those not swayed by the moral egregiousness of slavery to support abolitionism, in the South it was understood as a call to violent populist insurrection. The history of things like the Regulator movement and its bloody chaos could not have been far from the minds of an elite South Carolinian. But unlike then, when the Fall Line divided the slaveholding elite from the chaos of the backcountry, the spread of the cotton kingdom has brought slaveholding to all parts of the South, making the site of potential open and violent conflict everywhere. The book was made illegal in much of the South, and owning any version of it--the compendium or the full version--was punishable by a fine, jail time, or, in one case in Arkansas, execution!

In December 1859, as Congress reconvened, the House was unable to elect a speaker for *two months* because of the book. Republicans held the House and thus the Speakership, but with the GOP as an essentially regional party with almost no representation from the South, Southerners and sympathetic Northerners held up the vote for speaker. The leading candidate was W.T. Sherman's younger brother, John. However, Sherman and other Republicans had used Helper's book on the campaign trail. As such, many Southerners saw the Republican party--and Sherman in particular--as radicals set on stoking insurrection within the South. 

This book, and not the more famous Uncle Tom's Cabin, is the book that started the Civil War. The embrace of a radically anti-slavery book, written by a rabid white supermacist who rhetorically suggested insurrection and dispossesing elite whites of their property in both land and slaves, and which employed an *economic,* not moral, critique of slavery  by the Republican party suggested to many elite whites in the South that the North's opposition to slavery was not truly one of moral outrage at the maltreatment of enslaved black people, but rather an opportunity for economic and political domination over the South. The Republican party's embrace of this book made many in the South see the GOP as their sworn enemy, an enemy that desired not (in their mind) an end to an immoral practice--slavery--but rather to destroy the South. Certainly it was hyperbolic thinking--but these were hyperbolic times and Helper's book is nothing if not a work that advocates for a radical restructuring of the South.

We must also think about the recent context, both domestic and global, at work here. John Brown's raid on the Harper's Ferry armory was in 1859. just over a decade earlier, in 1848, a waves of revolutions swept Europe. The world seemed teetering on the brink of fire and destruction, and the South suspected they would be destroyed should the GOP, endorsing a radical book, come to power.

Comments/ideas/places they want to look?


