Planning for slavery lecture, 24 October

Begin by noting how widespread the practice was; global picture of its practice in the western hemisphere. Note the situation of slavery/freedom as it had developed. 

--When did Northern states, British Empire, Haiti, Latin America, etc ended slavery? By the eve the War, only still practiced in the South and Brazil. 

--4M enslaved africans brough to Latin America during the era of slavery, with 3.5M of them goign to Brazil.

Remark on history of how we talk about slavery, looking at the following books. These four books largely shape how we understand slavery during the 20th century; contemporary works, often filtered through the lens of current day ideas of social and racial justic, offer what amounts to continuations of these books' interpretations. Each of them has strengths and flaws; assessing these helps us to have a holistic picture of slavery.

Philips American Negro Slavery (1918). Phillips has many issues with his presentation of slavery, mostly shaped by his own essentially racist attitudes towards blacks. This is not to say that he defends or legitimizes slavery--in no way does he do that, he rcognizes its myraid problems--but that his understandings of how blacks lived and acted under slavery are shaped by ideas of inescapable black intellectual inferiority. HIs scholarship over the extent of slavery, the day to day life of the enslaved, and relationships with masters and the larger world is impeccable. Yet this focus on the daily lives of slaves is laudatory; while Phillips inevitaby presents enslaved blacks as docile and intellectually lacking, he also is sensitive to the issues of their plight and the intense pressures the system itself places all parties invovled in it under. His most central conclusion is that slavery, born out of economic logics (and even necessity) comes to have its own self-fulfilling logic after a while. By the 19th century, slavery no longer makes ecnomic sense--but there are so many slaves, and the threat of revolt is so real, that slavery becomes even more widely practiced and more passionately defended. Slavery then is, in Phillips' interpretation, something that antebellum whites see not as an ecnomic system, but as an inescapable means of social control; social control is the primary aspect of why slavery is practiced.

Stampp, The Peculiar Instiution (1956) For forty years, Phillips' book was the standard interpreation and shaped a generation of scholars and students who sought to understand slavery. Kenneth Stampp's research, which resulted in this book, showed the many problems of Phillips' book, particularly his lack of emphasis on the economic advantages of the system; Stampp also argues against the more paternalistic view of slavery that Phillps puts forth, suggesting that shlaveholders got as much labor out of their enslaved workers as possible. Stampp argued decisively that slavery *was* very economically profitibale, and that the economic advantages of the system were what slaveholders were trying to protect. He notes in his conclusion that these economic advantages overrode the moral qualms which many slaveholders had with slavery (pp. 424-25). The emphasis on ecnomic logics even extended to non-slavedholding whites: noting late in the book that the economic benefits did not extend to non-slaveholding whites, Stampp recognized the ways in which this shaped how slaveholders conceptuatlized and promoted slavery (pp 425-26). Thus, a shared sense of white identity was, to Stampp, born out of the eonomic world that slavery built, and this ecnomic determinism shaped how the South's laws, political thought, and social principles interacted with each other.

Genovese, Roll Jordan Roll (1974) In this massive book, Genovese (then a Marxist) largely effects a synthesis of Stampp and Phillps, and asks questions about what the world of slavery was like; it in some ways reads more like a work of sociology than a work of history, with interpreations put through lens of Marxist thinkers like the Italian revolutionary Antonio Gramsci. 	Gramsci's idea of "cultural hegemony" is deeply important to the book, as Genovese suggests that the world of slavery was a paternalistic relationship that allowed slaveholders to exercise absolute hegemonic power over the enslaved; this paternalism allowd them to, on the one hand, to maximize the labor output of the slaves, but, on the other hand allowed slaveholders to see themselves as kindly caretakers of their "people" (the language of family is vitally important for Genovese's study) rather than exploiters of labor. However, this has consequences for the slaves' views of themselves. Genevese illustrates how enslaved people ingest the rhetoric and ideas of the slaveholders. Slaves take the ideas their masters put forth about family and paternalistic duty seriously and, according to Genovese, take that logic to its conclusions and demand their own rights. For Genovese, a slavery that was not practiced absractly and remotely, as in the Carribbean and Brazil, but that involved direct interaction of the masters and the slaves in close, and even initimate, proximity, was a slavery that would have to be simultaneously concerned with maximized profitability (because slavery was expensive) and paternalistic control, a control that exercised hegemonic power over the enslaved. Yet, this same control's desire to appear as benign paternalism (so as to allow the slaveholders to understand themselves as decent people) produced a desire for self-determination and rights owed to them by enslaved blacks. The system shaped the worldview of the enslaved and gave them an intense pride in themselves, allowed them to create a robust culture of resistance and desire for freedom that nevertheless on the whole resisted an impulse towards violent revolution. Large numbers of black men would take up arms for the union army to fight for their freedom, but would also be the same people who, in the aftermath of slavery, would not harbor bloodlust towards their former masters. This helps to explain the tension we see in something like the opening chapter of Booker T. Washington's Up from Slavery. Ultimately, Geneovese argues that slavery creates a culture, particularly a religous culture, amongst the enslaved that insists on freedom and justice, but that eschews revolution for resistance.

Robert Fogel &Stanley Engerman, Time on the Cross (and the respone to it) (1974) as well. This book takes economic data (cliometrics) in a very detailed, in-depth way and examines slavery almost totally as economic. F&E argue that plantations were just as profitable and efficient as free farms in the Midwest, something that went against logic to this point (and this is a point that has largely stood the test of time). The book was immensely controversial when it came out, not for its inescapable conclusion--the ecnomic logic of slavery--but for the conclusions about slave treatement that they see comign out of economics. Economic logic, according to them, would have led slaveholders to have *no* incentives to mistreating the slaves. To them, mistreatment and abuse of slaves made no economic sense--why would someone hurt thier investment? Using early methods of computer-assisted analysis, they showed the massive amounts of capital and profits tied up in slavery, made arguments that longstanding understandings of the intrastate slave trade were faulty, and so forth. Further, they argued that primary source evidence showed that things like whippings were not nearly as widespread as often understood, using statistical analysis to prove this. Finally, they asserted most controversially that slaves intuited the protestant work ethic and that they themselves worked hard under slavery, thus undermining the need for maltreatement. 

The book was criticized soon after its appearance by Herbert Gutman, whose Slavery and the Numbers game largely argued against F&E's ideas of the less-harsh aspects of slavery. For Gutman, F&E had fallen in love with the statistics and had come to flawed conclusions based on these numbers; he suggests that they treat slavery as a numerical abstraction, rather than a real system involving human beings. He particularly picks apart their idea that slaves were not whipped as much as we had been lead to believe, as they base this argument too heavily a single piece of documentary evidence which Gutman suggests is unreliable for a number of reasons. The argument between F&E and responses like Gutman's continues and produces enduring controversies and new ideas about slavery, like what we see outlined in the essay y'all read for today.

Whta then are we to make of slavery, based on all of this? Jazz on this idea for a few minutes. What we ultimately cannot do, however, is deny a) the exploitative and cruel nature of slavery on the one hand or b) go to cartoonish ideas of sadistic villainy (e.g. DiCaprio in Django Unchained) as typical on the other.

Let us then look again at the numbers, and start to make some sense of what the relationship between slaves and slaveholders was actually like: 

Recall numbers of slaves; 4M enslaved, 250k free blacks
Recall number of slave holders; look at the discrepency between considering raw numbers of whites and thinking in terms of households

Discuss language; slave v. enslaved (the appropriateness of each term, each pointing to aspects of reality), your problem with "enslaver". Make clear that this is your argument and thoughts, that many will disagree with you, but this is why you use the language that you do.

Move to what Genovese says, especially as concernign the relationships between blacks and whites.