Syllabus

What is the operative question for this course? Quite simply it is "How does the literature of the South help us to understand the development of 'the South' as a place and, perhaps more importantly, an idea? How does literature itself develop in response to the historical situation of the South; in other words, how does Southern literature respond to Southern history? how does it shape our understanding of Southern history, and thus also our ideas of the South?"

What is meant by literature is, for our purposes, self-evident: poetry, fiction, memoir, etc. But what is meant by "South" is a more complex question. In our day, we can make several assertions about defining the South--what are some of those? What are the problems in defining those? 

Note we run into questions of *liminality*here--places that are only marginally Southern, or places where we find ourselves moving in and out of South. We should note, however, that those definitions of South and Southern liminality have *changed over time*, as we will see very early on this semester. For example, a place like Missouri is now considered firmly Midwestern--its placement in the SEC notwithstanding. Yet, in the mid 19th century, a significant faction of Missourians understood themselves as Southerners, and during the Civil War, Missouri had violent internal divisions, with a Confederate government setting itself up as the legitimate government of the people of Missouri, all while having a recognized pro-Union government. A novel like Huck Finn examines "Southern" aspects of Missouri while also looking at it as a place for "lighting out for the territories". This, then, was a place of contact between West and South; St. Louis--and, to a different exent, Cincinnati--both existed as semi-Southern outposts in the Midwest well into the 20th century; the widespread adoption of radio entertainment in the 1920s made many in the Deep South St. Louis Cardinals or Cincinnati Reds fans, for instance.

So, when defining "South," we face ideas of liminality--we know where the South is, but where its borders extend is a more difficult question. Attempts to explain South by things like the CSA are similarly vexing; after all, Kentucky is seen widely as Southern, and yet did not join the Confederacy (it had a story similar to Missouri's), while Maryland's staying in the Union seems open-and-shut to declare it as a "Northern" state, and yet its early historical development in the 17th and 18th century is essentially *exactly* parallel to that of Virginia--and Baltimore had statues to Maryland's Confederate soldiers and significant Confederate figures on display until the last few years. 

We then move to other attempts at explaining what the South is, based on its *features*. Unfortunately, many of these descriptive features are, in our day, essentially shaped by country music. When we define "the South", we are defining a world of primarily White rural America; in that, a Luke Bryan song is just as applicable to Iowa or Idaho as it is to Indian Land, SC--and maybe even more so now, as Indian Land (and all of Lancaster County) are being swallowed up by Charlotte. But of course, there has always been an urban aspect to the South as well; New Orleans and Charleston and Richmond, and later Atlanta and Memphis and Birmingham: these cities are important and vital sites of the experience of South. 

With all of these challenges, how then are we to define South?

This is a question that literature helps us answer, as it reveals several things to us.

1) South is dynamic; ideas of South are constantly in flux and changing over time, as well as *where* South is located and the liminal spaces that surround it. 
2) South is plural; there is no one "South", but rather multiple versions thereof: White and Black, urban and rural, deep and upper--these are the simplest versions of "South", and yet they themselves have significant variety. Attempts at defining a monolithic "South" are necessarily presuppossed upon fantasies of South that are foisted upon it. Which brings us ot the next thing
3) The South is a real place, with real peoples, real histories, socioeconomic and cultural realities, and yet it is is also *an idea*: throughout American history, the South is that place that, because of its unique history--a history shaped by climate, geography, and settlement patterns that are largely distinct from the rest of America--becomes a useful "other." As the "American Other", the South becomes a place of fantasy and escapism; it is "real America," it is a place of virtue and beauty and elegance. How many of you come from outside the South to USC with such a fantasy? But it is also the place that usefully becomes the site of all of the wrong things about Amreica, the place easily blamed. See curent politics. The South and the Confederacy become a means for discrediting ones political opponents (see the rhetoric of President Biden towards supporters of former President Trump); rather than engaging the perhaps complex reasons for why certain people think certain ways and have certain political opinions, it becomes useful simply to discredit  them: they are like the Confederacy, they are like Bull Connor; they are "Southerners" with all of the problems associated with that. 

The South as an ever-evolving, heterogeneous place that serves as an *idea* useful for understanding, critiquing, and navigating a greater American whole: this is the South that literature helps us to understand, and hopefully gives us a much fuller understanding of the region and its peoples. That is what we will explore this semester.